# The Linux Audio Stack
## The Role of a Sound Card / Audio Interface
A sound card handles the input and output of audio signals, converting between analog and digital forms. Sound cards typically include ADCs for recording, DACs for playback, and additional circuitry for audio processing (such as amplification, filtering, noise-removal, etc. …). In a nutshell sound cards act as the ears and the mouth of your computer.

## The Linux Audio Stack
Similar to the Network Layers the Linux audio system utilizes a modular and layered architecture to handle audio processing, which provides both abstraction and flexibility. Layering in Linux audio allows for a structured approach to audio management. By separating concerns into different layers, the system abstracts the complexities of lower-level operations, such as direct hardware interactions.

## ALSA (Advanced Linux Sound Architecture)
Let’s start with the foundation of all Linux systems when it comes to audio. ALSA is the core layer of the Linux audio stack. It provides low-level audio hardware control, including drivers for sound cards and basic audio functionality. ALSA provides a standardized interface for audio hardware, allowing applications to interact with sound cards and other audio devices without needing to know the specifics of the hardware.
ALSA operates in the kernel space, meaning it interacts directly with the Linux kernel. This position allows it to manage hardware resources and perform low-level audio operations efficiently.

## JACK, PulseAudio and PipeWire
The Jack Audio Connection Kit - better known as JACK - is a professional-grade audio server designed for UNIX-oid operating systems, including Linux. It is tailored for real-time, low-latency audio processing and is widely used in professional audio production.
PulseAudio is a sound server for Linux and other UNIX-oid operating systems that sits on top of the lower-level ALSA. It provides a higher-level interface for audio management, offering additional features beyond those available through ALSA.
PulseAudio provides a more intuitive and user-friendly way to manage audio compared to working directly with ALSA. Its ability to handle various audio sources and outputs simultaneously, along with network capabilities, makes it versatile for different audio needs and setups. Makingbit easy for non professional to setup audio easily
PipeWire is a modern multimedia framework designed for Linux systems that aims to unify and enhance the handling of both audio and video streams. Developed as a replacement for both PulseAudio and JACK, PipeWire provides a flexible and efficient infrastructure for managing complex multimedia tasks. PipeWire combines the capabilities of audio servers like PulseAudio and low-latency audio servers like JACK into a single framework. It also supports video processing and capture, making it a comprehensive solution for managing both audio and video streams.
PipeWire is designed to be highly flexible, accommodating various use cases ranging from consumer audio and video to professional audio production and due to its video capabilities also video conferencing. It provides a unified API that can handle both audio and video streams, simplifying development and integration for applications that need to process multimedia content.

# Prerequisites
- Packages needed
  - `pipewire wireplumber` the actual package and session manager
  - `pipewire-alsa pipewire-pulse pipewire-jack` for syncing different clients
  - `helvum` for GTK Frontend
 
# Steps
1. Install
2. Activate the services.
  - `systemctl --user enable --now pipewire.socket`
  - `systemctl --user enable --now pipewire-pulse.socket`
  - `systemctl --user enable --now wireplumber.service`

# Playerctl
`playerctl --player=firefox pause`

# OBS

PipeWire in Arch 
